Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Ashley Randall. She's professor
in the School of Counseling and Counseling Psychology at
Arizona State University. And today we're going to talk
about relationship science, sexual minority and gender diverse individuals
in romantic relationships, and some other related topics. So,
Doctor Randall, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for having me, Ricardo.
So before we get into the more specific topics,
let me just start with a more general question.
So what is relationship science and what kinds of
questions do you tackle there?
Yeah, so this is a great question and one
that I hope will really entice everyone to fall
in love, um, no pun intended, with relationship science.
Essentially, relationship science is the discovery of how it
is that people or groups, um, either initiate, form.
Engage in relationship maintenance behaviors and unfortunately, right, we
know that not all relationships work out, and so
there's also elements of studying relationship dissolution or breakup.
Yet essentially, if you think about all the relationships
that we have in the world, whether that be
with our parents, our caregivers, our siblings. Neighbors, friends,
romantic partner, employees, you can kind of go on
and on. Um, WE and relationship science study all
of these elements and, and try to understand what
really makes people have good, healthy, and, uh, beneficial
relationships in their lives.
And so you study the experiences of sexual minority
and gender diverse individuals in romantic relationships. I mean,
what got you interested in that topic specifically? Is
it because they constitute a group of marginalized individuals
that perhaps do not receive too much attention in
relationship science, or do they have any particular interesting
traits or some other reason?
Yes, um, so a little bit of, um, both
professional and personal, so I think that one of
the things we always think about is that oftentimes
people study things that are important or, you know,
salient to their own identity and so that's one
element for me, um, of studying, uh, sexual minority
individuals, yeah, from a, you know, more. SCIENTIFIC and
um professional side of things is that I started
my career really looking at the role of stress
in close relationships and without any defining factors of
trying to understand, well, for certain groups of couples,
are these how processes may work out or for
under certain context, how do things, you know, uh,
necessarily matriculate. And so I think that in doing
the research and as I continued to grow as
a scholar and collaborate with others is that my
mind really started to expand thanks to the help
of collaborators and um talks and everything like that
that I've been engaging with with continuing education. Of
really trying to elevate the voices of those who
have been traditionally underrepresented in our science and of
particular interest, um, has become the role of the
lived experiences of sexual minority and gender diverse individuals
and myself, along with many collaborators really look at
this also from a global lens, um, because we
know that unfortunately, there's uh a predominant voice of
those who identify. Um, AS white and those who
come from, uh, North America or currently living in
North America that are overrepresented. And so it's really
with the, the thought of elevating those voices that,
um, are so incredibly important that have, right, some
of these disparaging, um, situations that may predispose them
negatively to psychological, um, physical health issues, etc. um,
THAT I really started to pivot and, and look
towards, uh, these topics.
Yes, and please correct me if I'm wrong, but
I would imagine that relationship sciences with other kinds
of behavioral or psychological sciences, must be perhaps focused
on. Uh, HETEROSEXUAL couples because they constitute the majority
and so I would imagine that perhaps studying sexual
minority and gender diverse individuals would also expand uh
the view we have of uh romantic relationships,
correct? Absolutely, Ricardo, and I think that like, you
know, I mean, it's an interesting question because I
think the data is a little bit more challenging
to try to pin down, um, obviously because of.
Uh, SOCIOPOLITICAL climates all over the globe about whom
identifies as such. Yet one of the things that
we know from scholars, not myself, but certainly prior
work, um, is that the relationship components of how
people engage in daily, you know, engage in daily
functioning, so to speak, of their relationships are quite
similar amongst those that identify as heterosexual and are
in a relationship with, um, you know, a same
same gendered person. Um, AND so it's really trying
to then not necessarily understand what's going on within,
right, that relationship, but trying to understand the broader,
uh, systemic factors that impact individuals within those relationships.
And so, you mentioned briefly that you were interested
in stress theory. So what is minority stress theory
and how does it impact, uh, romantic relationships?
Excellent question. So Ricardo, as you probably are quite
familiar with and hopefully the viewers as well, is
that all good questions originate from a theory or
a framework which helps guide us in terms of
how it is that we, um, you know, view
the world and, and view the lens. So one
of the predominant theories that we look at in
our research is minority stress theory. And this is
a term that has become quite popular by Elan
Meyer and colleagues, but we certainly want to acknowledge
previous and historical contributions or prior contributions rather from
Brooks and colleagues. But essentially what minority stress theory
posits is that because of one's identity. That they
may be predisposed to experiencing stress in their social
environments. Now, in this case, minority stress theory would
posit that if one holds any type of minority
identity in a majority culture or a majority society,
then because of laws, regulations, maybe even viewpoints of
the predominant majority, that that could predispose them to
stress. So, in our context, looking at um identifying
as lesbian, gay, or bisexual, that um could be
an element, certainly of a minoritized identity. And so
within living in a heteronormative society, these individuals are
actually predisposed to greater reports of stress because of
elements of potential lack of belonging, um, increased discrimination
or higher reports of discrimination in the workplace, um,
lack of family acceptance, etc.
Mhm. And how does uh minority stre, what are
the implications of minority stress for understanding uh how
stress impacts the relationship from outside and from within
in the case of outside, for example, the context
of the workplace and other places like that. So
could you tell us about that?
Yes, absolutely. So one of the things that um
that people may not. Um, I would say explicitly
think about, is that we have different sources of
stress. So even Ricardo, if I ask you, like,
what stresses you out, you don't have to answer
that, um, yet, what stresses you out, you may
think of something that is, right, solely affecting you,
something that's affecting yourself and your family members, what
have you. Yet there are two different sources of
stress that my colleague and I have identified, or
at least um identified through the literature, um, which
are those stressors that happen outside of the relationship,
which we think about as external stressors, which would
be the examples of discrimination and everything as you
noted, and alternatively, there's stress inside the relationship, right?
So differing partner goals, um, annoying habits from one's
partner, etc. Yet what people fail to realize is
that oftentimes, we start to compartmentalize, and understandably so,
our lives, and please know that I'm coming from
an individualistic uh culture and and perspective in that
regard, um, wherein it's, this has something to do
with work, has nothing to do with my relationship.
Well, what's interesting is that we often bring our
stress home, not surprising, right? So that way, we
are either verbally or non-verbally communicating how these outside
experiences are affecting us now and how we're bringing
those into the home environment. So while minority stress
theory would help us identify some of those outside
or external stressors, it's constructs like stress spillover. And
stress crossover that allow us to really understand how
stress can spill over from outside the relationship to
inside the relationship, and then also crossover from my
experience to my partner's experience as well.
And how do couples in general deal with stress?
Well, this is a great question, and I wish
that I had one overarching answer for all of
this. However, um, as any good scientist would probably
say, it depends, right? It depends on a lot
of factors, it depends on a lot of ways
in which couples have identified within their even their
subsystem of what works. Now, from an empirical side
of things, what we have determined is that it's
incredibly important. That partners verbalize their stress to their
partner. Now John Gottman and colleagues have often thought
that upwards of 93% of our communication is nonverbal.
So if we come home and we're upset and
we're not talking to our partner, we are immediately
going into the office or immediately jumping on a
phone call. Or what have you, and not engaging,
we're still communicating, right? We're communicating that we don't
have time to engage with our partners. So it's
very important that we have couples rely on that
7% of verbal communication, because what we find in
the literature is that if couples are able to
communicate verbally to their stress, their partner is then
better equipped to then actually provide that support to
them in a positive manner.
And when it comes to dealing with stress, are
there any particularities of being part of a social
minority that people have to deal with?
Absolutely, right. So, Ricardo, we had noted just in
terms of the earlier example of minority stress theory.
Yet, if we think with inside the individual, um,
there are sources of stress that pertain to one's
like identity, right? So some individuals, and I'm predominantly
talking about sexual minority individuals, they could have negative
thoughts or, you know, experiences about their own identity
in the context of a larger community setting. So,
that term is often referred to as internalized homophobia,
meaning I have internalized what it, like the negative
aspects of what it may mean to be a
sexual minority individual because of my outside sources and
my outside community. Then if we start to broaden
out the individual perspective to look at the family
unit, um, certainly sources of stress could be surrounding,
um, you know, not being accepted for one's sexual
orientation, um, not being accepted, um, not only within
the immediate family unit, but within the larger family
unit. If we think about community elements, um, if
one is living in a predominantly conservative community, um,
or predominantly conservative culture, there may actually be both
implicit and explicit laws that preclude them from engaging
in that behavior and engaging in those relationships. So
what you can see from just those, you know,
quick, um, examples is that there really is a
multiplicative effect of how much stress can then be,
um, you know, affecting these individuals and, and of
course I'm ignoring uh quite a large um statement
point of, you know, we can look across the
globe in terms of our sociopolitical climates to understand,
um, some of the targets that these individuals are
either directly or indirectly facing.
Mhm, YES, I and I would imagine also things
like social condemnation because I mean people who are
part of uh same-sex couples, for example, or have
some sort of gender identity that is minoritarian. Tend
to be more or at least more than the
general population tend to be targets of discrimination and
social condemnation because of their minority identities,
right? Absolutely, absolutely.
Um, AND what is the relationship between sexual orientation,
discrimination, something that I was sort of alluding to,
and depression among same-sex couples.
Yes, well, Ricardo, it would probably not surprise anyone
that if we are um experiencing or if individuals
are experiencing higher, you know, rates of discrimination, higher
rates of internalized homophobia, that what we have found
in our research, and these are partnered individuals, so
even though they're in a romantic relationship. AND have
that um hopefully support buffer in place is that
we're still finding associations and positive associations between those
experiences and individual reports of depression, anxiety, and even
generalized stress. So said differently is that it's not
surprising if individuals. Or groups of individuals whom 1
may come across to say, I'm not really feeling
like that great. I'm not really feeling like myself.
I'm, I'm having trouble, right, having motivation. I feel
anxious in these situations. And then if we look
to see, well, are you also experiencing, you know,
elements of discrimination in your life or internalized homophobia,
it's not surprising that we're seeing that that association
exists.
And I would imagine that, I mean, because of
discrimination, discrimination can affect the, in certain cases, the
relationship itself, right in the sense that if people
feel socially discriminated because of the kind of romantic
relationship they have, they might start having negative feelings
about the relationship itself. Is, I mean, is that
something that happens or?
Absolutely, Ricardo. I mean, and it's not surprising, right?
So I think sometimes we would like to think
um that we exist in a vacuum, so to
speak, or that our experiences don't impact others, yet
that's absolutely impossible because we're social beings, right? We're
constantly interacting with others, um, we are seeing individuals,
um, maybe even for a second, a more engaging
and longer conversations, but we're still impacted by those
dynamics. And so because of how much partners are
connected with one another and share that interdependence, um,
it is not surprising then that those negative experiences
can not only affect, like myself as an example,
but they can also negatively impact my partner's outcomes
as well.
Mhm. And can depression be mitigated? And if so,
which factors play a role in that mitigation?
So depression can absolutely be mitigated, and Ricardo, just
to um not bore the, the listeners of this
podcast of how long we could go on about
this, I'm gonna broaden it or bring it in
a little bit just in terms of the context
that we're talking about, um, in that one of
the areas that we focus on in our research
is really operating from a strength-based perspective, meaning, We
recognize that these negative, um, constructs or negative ideas
exist or, or negative experiences exist rather. Yet what
it is that we try to do is say,
because these exist, are there things that we can
Have couples, have individuals who are in relationships think
about to actually offset some of these negative experiences.
And a lot of the work that we've done,
um, both here within the US and then also
from a global perspective as well, is look at
the role of dyadic coping. And what this means
is that if I'm in a relationship with my
partner, And we are that unit that I mentioned,
is that my experiences of stress and how I'm
gonna cope with these things are really reliant on
my partner as well, so we're a team. So
one of the things that we look at is
that if I am then communicating that stress to
my partner, and my partner then responds positively to
me, not saying that's great that you're stressed, yet
rather, how can I help you, maybe think about
some of these things. I'm really sorry that's. Happening,
how can I emotionally support you? What we find
is that those levels of depression and general reports
of stress and anxiety are actually decreased. So it's
really looking towards how we can encourage couples to
communicate about these stressors, because it not only has
impacts for oneself, but also the relationship.
Yes, and I would imagine that in this particular
case, because usually it would be both partners experiencing
depression due to discrimination that they would tend to
be a little bit more understanding. Toward each other,
I mean, because they're both experiencing similar things, correct?
Yeah, perhaps, Ricardo, and there's a lot of really
interesting um research that I think still needs to
be done, of course, is that there's this idea,
right, of understanding. If one partner identifies as such,
right, how does that other partner's identity also impact
their joint experiences? So what we are starting to
do with some of the data that we have
is to look at if one partner identifies as
a sexual minority individual, so lesbian, gay, or bisexual,
the other partner may identify as heterosexual, right? Because
we can be attracted to different people. So in
those. Context, just from a sexual orientation identity perspective,
are we seeing different relationship, um, maintenance behaviors, so
behaviors that, you know, continue to allow the relationship
to continue? Are we seeing different dynamics on a
daily perspective? And essentially, ultimately, what are the resources
that we can have based on empirical science to
help people live healthy and happy lives?
So what is the advice you would give couples
who are facing stress, particularly if they are part
of a minority?
This is a great question. And I often say
that if I could figure out how to solve
for everyone not to have stress, then, um, that
would be the ideal situation, and I think it's
quite a lofty goal. Um, SO that being said
is that I think one, recognizing and owning one's
experience. Um, ONE has to realize that unfortunately, there
are a multitude of stressors that exist in the
world, and, um, it's almost at times trying to
figure out. What are the stressors and, and what
is it, not only the stressors that I'm experiencing,
but why are these so stressful for me? And
I know that that may seem a little bit
counterintuitive, yet all of us may have missed a
deadline, um, or all of us may have had
a troubling interaction with a family member. Ricardo, like
if you have that stress, that might mean something
a little bit different for you than it would
for me. So I think one, turning inward and
trying to understand why is this so important for
me, or what is the stress that's really going
on. And then having time to then communicate that
to one's romantic partner and even one's community of
support, right? So I think that it's important to
think about, um, that we surround ourselves with, you
know, high-quality relationships, and it's the quality, not the
quantity. So I think being able to identify those
stressors and then communicating to those that we think
will be able to provide us that support, and
I think also telling people, this is what I
need. I need you to just listen, right? Or
I need you to help me figure this out,
because oftentimes we assume what people want and then
we may start offering suggestions, but in actuality, that's
not what people need.
Mhm. And where can individuals go if they are
interested in these topics, the topics we covered today?
Yeah, absolutely, Ricardo. So one, I'm self-serving. I'm happy
to, of course, to share a link to a
website or any publications that I have. There are
also some phenomenal resources um through the American Psychological
Association, um, website. And so under the American Psychological
Association website, there are different divisions and so in
particular Division 17, the Society of Counseling Psychology. Uh,
Division 44, the Society of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Diversity, and even Society, uh, excuse me, Division 52,
the Society for Global Psychology, all of these different
societies will have relevant resources particular to these groups,
so I would encourage individuals to check those out.
Great, and if people are interested, where can they
find you and your work on the internet?
Absolutely. So feel free if you Google um Ashley
K. Randall, PhD or Ashley K. Randall at Arizona
State University, um, hopefully my information will come up.
Um, HOWEVER, you are absolutely happy, anyone's, I'm happy
to, um, or I'm willing to receive an email
from all of you at Ashley.k.Randall@ASU.edu.
Great. So, Doctor Randall, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show and
share this very important and interesting information with us.
Uh, IT'S been a pleasure to talk to you.
My pleasure, Ricardo. Thank you so much for the
very important questions, um, and I look forward to
future connections.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.